.\" Manpage for MiRA
.\" For a tutorial about writing a manpage, see
.\" http://www.linuxhowtos.org/System/creatingman.htm and
.\" https://liw.fi/manpages/
.TH ymira 1 "4 April 2025" "Version 2.4.2" "MiRA image reconstruction algorithm"
.\"
.SH NAME
ymira \- reconstruct an image from optical interferometric data
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ymira
[\fI\,OPTION\/\fR]... \fI\,INPUT\/\fR... \fI\,OUTPUT\/\fR
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
MiRA is a software to reconstruct images from optical interferometric data.
The algorithm performs a regularized fit of the data with additional
constraints such as normalization and lower and/or upper bounds.
.PP
\fI\,INPUT\/\fR... are the input OI-FITS data file(s) and \fI\,OUTPUT\/\fR is
the result saved into a FITS file.
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
Options are introduced by a word prefixed with one or two hyphens (at your
convenience).  In case the first input file starts with an hyphen, a double
hyphen can be used to indicate the end of the options.
.PP
Some options have units.  Angles must be suffixed with \fBmas\fR,
\fBmilliarcsec\fR, \fBmilliarcsecond\fR, \fBmilliarcseconds\fR, \fBdeg\fR,
\fBdegree\fR, \fBdegrees\fR, \fBrad\fR, \fBradian\fR or \fBradians\fR.  Lengths
must be suffixed with \fBm\fR, \fBmeter\fR, \fBmeters\fR, \fBmm\fR,
\fBmillimeter\fR, \fBmillimeters\fR, \fBµm\fR, \fBmicron\fR, \fBmicrons\fR,
\fBmicrometer\fR, \fBmicrometers\fR, \fBnm\fR, \fBnanometer\fR or
\fBnanometers\fR.
.PP
Some options may take several values which are separated by commas.
.\"
.SS Data Selection
The following options can be used to select which data to consider.  If no
spectral range is given (either with options \fB\-effwave\fR and
\fB\-effband\fR or with options \fB\-wavemin\fR and \fB\-wavemax\fR), an image
is reconstructed from all available wavelengths.
.TP
\fB\-target\fR=\fI\,name\/\fR
Specify the name of the astrophysical object.  This option is used to select a
specific target from the input file(s).  If there is a single target which is
identical in all input files, this option may be omitted.
.TP
\fB\-effwave\fR=\fI\,length\/\fR
Specify the effective wavelength; for example, \fB\-effwave=1.6micron\fR.
This is the central wavelength of the spectral range to consider.
.TP
\fB\-effband\fR=\fI\,length\/\fR
Specify the effective bandwidth; for example, \fB\-effband=200nm\fR.
This the full width of the spectral range to consider.
.TP
\fB\-wavemin\fR=\fI\,length\/\fR
Specify the minimum wavelength; for example, \fB\-wavemin=1.5µm\fR.
This the lower bound of the spectral range to consider.
.TP
\fB\-wavemax\fR=\fI\,length\/\fR
Specify the maximum wavelength; for example, \fB\-wavemin=1.7µm\fR.
This the upper bound of the spectral range to consider.
.\"
.SS Which Data to Fit and How
By default, MiRA attempts to fit all available data (providing it knws how to
handle this kind of data).  Omitting some kind of data is possible with the
following options.  The metric used to compare the model and the data can also
be tuned.
.TP
\fB\-use_vis\fR=\fBall\fR|\fBnone\fR|\fBamp\fR|\fBphi\fR
Specify which complex visibility data to consider.  Can be \fBall\fR,
\fBnone\fR, \fBamp\fR or \fBphi\fR to use all complex visibility data, to not
use any complex visibility data, to use only their amplitudes or to use only
their phase.  Default is \fBall\fR.
.TP
\fB\-use_vis2\fR=\fBall\fR|\fBnone\fR
Specify which powerspectrum data to consider.  Default is \fBall\fR.
.TP
\fB\-use_t3\fR=\fBall\fR|\fBnone\fR|\fBamp\fR|\fBphi\fR
Specify which bispectrum data to consider.  Can be \fBall\fR, \fBnone\fR,
\fBamp\fR or \fBphi\fR to use all bispectrum data, to not use any bispectrum
data, to use only the amplitudes of the bispectrum or to use only the phase
closure data.  Default is \fBall\fR.
.TP
\fB\-convexcost\fR=\fByes\fR|\fBno\fR
Use convex approximation for fitting complex data?  The default is
\fB\-convexcost\fR=\fByes\fR.
.TP
\fB\-phasecost\fR=\fBvonmises\fR|\fBhaniff\fR|\fBconvexlimit\fR
Co-log-likelihood approximation to use for phase-only data.  The default is
\fB\-phasecost\fR=\fBvonmises\fR which is also the recommended value.
.\"
.SS Image Settings

If no initial image is provided as a FITS file (see options \fB\-initial\fR and
\fB\-initialhdu\fR), the pixel size (with option \fB\-pixelsize\fR) and the
image dimensions (with options \fB\-fov\fR or \fB\-dim\fR) must be specified.
If an initial image file is given, the initial image may be resized to match
these settings.
.TP
\fB\-pixelsize\fR=\fI\,angle\/\fR
Specify the angular size of pixels.  For example, \fB\-pixelsize=0.1mas\fR.
.TP
\fB\-fov\fR=\fI\,angle\/\fR
Specify the angular size of the field of view. For example, \fB\-fov=20mas\fR.
.TP
\fB\-imagesize\fR=\fI\,dim\/\fR|\fI\,dim1\/\fRx\fI\,dim2\/\fR
Specify the number of pixels per side of the image.
For example, \fB\-dim=200\fR or \fB\-dim=300x200\fR.
.TP
\fB\-flux\fR=\fI\,value\/\fR
Specify the sum of pixel values.  The default value is 1.
.TP
\fB\-fluxerr\fR=\fI\,value\/\fR
Specify the standard deviation for the flux.  Must be a nonnegative value.  A
value of zero implies a strict flux constraint.  The default value is
\fB\-fluxerr=0\fR, that is a strict constraint is applied.  Note that a lower
bound other than \fB\-min=0\fR or specifying an upper bound (with option
\fB\-max\fR=\fI\,upper\/\fR) is not compatible with a strict flux constraint
because it is implemented by means or renormalization.  Specify a strictly
positive standard deviation of the flux (for instance \fB\-fluxerr=1e-3\fR),
if non-standard bound constraints are chosen.
.TP
\fB\-min\fR=\fI\,lower\/\fR
Specify the lower bound for the pixel values.
A recommended setting is:\fB\-min=0\fR.  See the comments about option
\fB\-fluxerr\fR above if a value different from zero is chosen.
.TP
\fB\-max\fR=\fI\,upper\/\fR
Specify the upper bound for the pixel values.  See the comments about option
\fB\-fluxerr\fR above if an upper bound is imposed.
.\"
.SS Direct Model
.TP
\fB\-xform\fR=\fI\,name\/\fR
Specify the method to compute the complex visibilities given the image.
Argument \fI\,name\/\fR can be \fBnfft\fR, \fBseparable\fR or
\fBnonseparable\fR.  \fBnfft\fR is the fastest but cannot account for
non-stationary effects such as spectral bandwidth smearing.  \fBseparable\fR is
slower and has the same restrictions (it is only interesting if YNFFT plugin is
not installed, see <https://github.com/emmt/ynfft>).  \fBnonseparable\fR is the
slowest but is mandatory if spectral bandwidth smearing is to be taken into
account.  Beware that \fBseparable\fR and \fBnonseparable\fR have high memory
requirements (of the order of the number of pixels times the number of
different spatial frequencies in the data).
.TP
\fB\-smearingfunction\fR=\fI\,name\/\fR
Specify the function to model the effects of the spectral bandwidth smearing.
Argument \fI\,name\/\fR can be \fBnone\fR, \fBsinc\fR, or \fBgauss\fR to ignore
bandwidth smearing or to model bandwidth smearing by a cardinal sine or by a
Gaussian (whose full-width at half-maximum matches that of the cardinal sine).
To account for spectral bandwidth smearing, options
\fB\-xform\fR=\fBnonseparable\fR and \fB\-smearingfunction\fR=\fBsinc\fR (or
\fB\-smearingfunction\fR=\fBgauss\fR) must be chosen.  In addition, option
\fB\-smearingfactor\fR=\fI\,value\/\fR (see below) may be used to tune the
importance of the smearing.
.TP
\fB\-smearingfactor\fR=\fI\,value\/\fR
Set the factor to scale the effects of the spectral bandwidth smearing.  The
full-width at half-maximum of the effective spectral bandwidth is assumed to be
equal to \fI\,value\/\fR times the \fBEFF_BAND\fR parameter in the data.  The
default is \fI\,value\/\fR=\fB1.0\fR.
.\"
.SS Regularization Settings
.TP
\fB\-regul\fR=\fI\,name\/\fR
Specify the name of the regularization method.
.TP
\fB\-mu\fR=\fI\,value(s)\/\fR
Specify the global regularization weight(s) µ.  If a single value is given, it
will be used for all reconstructions.  If two values are given (separated by
comas), a different value of µ will be used for each reconstructions with the
values of µ spaced at equal ratios from \fI\,start\/\fR to \fI\,stop\/\fR (that
is, equally spaced logarithmically).
.TP
\fB\-tau\fR=\fI\,value\/\fR
Specify the edge preserving threshold.
\fI\,value\/\fR must be strictly positive.
.TP
\fB\-eta\fR=\fI\,value(s)\/\fR
Specify the gradient scales along dimensions.
.TP
\fB\-gamma\fR=\fI\,angle\/\fR
Specify the a priori full half width at half maximum (FWHM).
For example: \fB\-gamma=15mas\fR.
.\"
.SS Initial Image
The image reconstruction starts with an initial image which may be provided by
the user or automatically generated.
.TP
\fB\-initial\fR=\fI\,name\/\fR
Specify the FITS file or method for initial image.  If argument \fI\,name\/\fR
is \fBDirac\fR or \fBrandom\fR, the initial image is a centered point-like
object or a map of random pixels.  Otherwise, \fI\,name\/\fR is the name of a
FITS file with the initial image.
.TP
\fB\-initialhdu\fR=\fI\,name\/\fR
Specify the name of the FITS extension (FITS keyword HDUNAME) which contains
the initial image in the OI-Imaging input file.  This option is only allowed
with in OI-Imaging mode, that is when option \fB\-oi-imaging\fR is specified.
.TP
\fB\-seed\fR=\fI\,value\/\fR
Specify the seed for the random generator.
.\"
.SS Reconstruction Strategy
.TP
\fB\-bootstrap\fR=\fI\,count\/\fR
Specify the number of bootstrapping iterations.
.TP
\fB\-recenter\fR
Recenter result of bootstrapping iterations.
.TP
\fB\-threshold\fR=\fI\,fraction\/\fR
Specify the level for soft-thresholding input image(s).  The threshold level is
the fraction of non-zero pixels to set to zero.  For instance,
\fB\-threshold=0.3\fR will soft-threshold the initial image so that 30% of the
least (in magnitude) nonzero pixels are cleared.
.\"
.SS Information
.TP
\fB\-quiet\fR
Suppress most messages.
.TP
\fB\-verb\fR=\fI\,count\/\fR
Set the verbose level.  Information will be printed every \fI\,count\/\fR
iteration.  Also see option \fB\-view\fR.
.\"
.SS Optimizer Settings
.TP
\fB\-mem\fR=\fI\,number\/\fR
Specify the number of previous steps to memorize in VMLMB.
.TP
\fB\-ftol\fR=\fI\,real\/\fR
Specify the function relative tolerance for the global convergence.
.TP
\fB\-gtol\fR=\fI\,real\/\fR
Specify the gradient relative tolerance for the global convergence.
.TP
\fB\-xtol\fR=\fI\,real\/\fR
Specify the varaibles relative tolerance for the global convergence.
.TP
\fB\-maxiter\fR=\fI\,number\/\fR
Specify the maximum number of iterations for all reconstructions.
.TP
\fB\-maxeval\fR=\fI\,number\/\fR
Specify the maximum number of evaluations of the objective function for all
reconstructions.
.\"
.SS Line Search Parameters
.TP
\fB\-sftol\fR=\fI\,real\/\fR
Specify the function tolerance for the line search.
.TP
\fB\-sgtol\fR=\fI\,real\/\fR
Specify the gradient tolerance for the line search.
.TP
\fB\-sxtol\fR=\fI\,real\/\fR
Specify the step tolerance for the line search.
.\"
.SS Output File
.TP
\fB\-overwrite\fR
Overwrite output file if it exists.
.TP
\fB\-bitpix\fR=\fI\,number\/\fR
Specify the bits per pixel for the output FITS file.  Default is \fB-32\fR,
that is 32-bit floating point values.
.TP
\fB\-save\_initial\fR
Save initial image as a secondary HDU in the output file.
.TP
\fB\-save\_data\_model\fR
Save input data along with their models in the output file.
.TP
\fB\-save\_visibilities\fR
Save model complex visibilities in the output file.
.TP
\fB\-save\_dirty\_beam\fR
Save the dirty beam in the output file.
.TP
\fB\-save\_dirty\_map\fR
Save the dirty map in the output file.
.TP
\fB\-save\_residual\_map\fR
Save the residual map in the output file.
.\"
.SS Miscellaneous
.TP
\fB\-plugin\fR=\fI\,name\/\fR
Specify the name or the path of a plugin to load.  If \fI\,name\/\fR is
terminated by a "\fB.i\fR", it is assumed to be the path of a Yorick file to
include; otherwise, the Yorick code of the plugin is assumed to be in a file
named "\fBmira2_plugin_\fIname\fB.i\fR" which is searched first in the
directory where is installed MiRA then in Yorick standard search paths.

A plugin may add its own command line options.  See file
"\fBmira2_plugin_central_star.i\fR" for an example of plugin code.

.TP
\fB\-oi-imaging\fR
Specify to run MiRA in OI-Imaging mode. There must be exactly two positional arguments,
one input and one output file, both being OI-FITS files following OI-Imaging standard
(described in https://github.com/JMMC-OpenDev/OI-Imaging-JRA). Command line options have
precedence over the settings defined in the input file. This option implies
\fB\-save\_model\_data\fR.
.TP
\fB\-help\fR
Print out this help.
.TP
\fB\-version\fR
Print out version number.
.\"
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.PP
Environment variables \fBMIRA_SRCDIR\fR and \fBMIRA_YORICK\fR may be set to
specify the directory where are installed the sources and the path to the
Yorick interpreter.
.PP
.\"
.\".SH BUGS
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Éric Thiébaut <https://github.com/emmt/MiRA>
.\"
.SH REFERENCES
Thiébaut, É.: \fI\,MiRA: an effective imaging algorithm for optical
interferometry\/\fR, in SPIE Proc. Astronomical Telescopes and Instrumentation
\fB7013\fR, 70131I-1-70131I-12 (2008) <http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.788822>
.PP
Thiébaut, É. & Giovannelli, J.-F.: \fI\,Image Reconstruction in Optical
Interferometry\/\fR, in IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. \fB27\fR,
pp. 97-109 (2010) <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2009.934870>
.PP
Thiébaut, É. & Young J.: \fI\,Principles of image reconstruction in optical
interferometry: a tutorial\/\fR, in Journal of the Optical Society of America
A, vol. \fB34\fR, pp. 904-923 (2017) <http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.34.000904>
